Early in our lives, we become aware of the tendency of all material objects to be attracted towards the earth.Anything thrown up falls down towards the earth, going uphill is lot more tiring than going downhill, raindrops from the clouds above fall towards the earth and  there are many other such phenomena.Historically it was the Italian Physicist Galileo (1564-1642) who recognised the fact that all bodies, irrespective of their masses, are accelerated towards the earth with a constant acceleration.It is said  that he made a public demonstration of this fact.To find the truth, he certainly did experiments with bodies rolling down inclined planes and arrived at a value of the acceleration due to gravity which is close to the more accurate value obtained later.
A seemingly unrelated phenomenon, observation of stars, planets and their motion has been the subject of attention in many countries since the earliest of times.Observations since early times recognised stars which appeared in the sky with positions unchanged year after year.The more interesting objects are the planets which seem to have regular motions against the background of stars.The earliest recorded model for planetary motions proposed by Ptolemy about 2000 years ago was a ‘geocentric’ model in which all celestial objects, stars, the sun and the planets, all revolved around the earth.The only motion that was thought to be possible for celestial objects was motion in a circle.Complicated schemes of motion  were put forward by Ptolemy in order to describe the observed motion of the planets.The planets were described as moving in circles with the centre of the circles themselves moving in larger circles.Similar theories were also advanced by Indian astronomers some 400 years later.However a more elegant model in which the Sun was the centre around which the planets revolved – the ‘heliocentric’ model – was already mentioned by Aryabhatta (5th century A.D.) in his treatise.A thousand years later, a Polish monk named Nicolas Copernicus (1473-1543) proposed a definitive model in which the planets moved in circles around a fixed central sun.His theory was discredited by the church, but notable amongst its supporters was Galileo who had to face prosecution from the state for his beliefs.
It was around the same time as Galileo, a nobleman called Tycho Brahe (1546-1601) hailing from Denmark, spent his entire lifetime recording observations of the planets with the naked eye.His compiled data were analysed later by his assistant Johannes Kepler (1571-1640).He could extract from the data three elegant laws that now go by the name of Kepler’s laws.These laws were known to Newton and enabled him to make a great scientific leap in proposing his universal law of gravitation.
Select two points F1 and F2.Take a length of a string and  fix its ends at F1 and F2 by pins.With the tip of a pencil  stretch the string taut and then draw a curve by moving the pencil keeping the string taut throughout.(Fig.8.1(b))  The closed curve you get is called an ellipse.Clearly for any point T on the ellipse, the sum of the distances from F1 and F2 is a constant.F1, F2 are called the focii.Join the points F1 and F2  and extend  the line to intersect the ellipse at points P and A as shown in Fig.8.1(b).The midpoint of the line PA is the centre of the ellipse O and the length PO = AO  is called the semi-major axis of the ellipse.For a circle, the two focii  merge into one  and the semi-major axis becomes the radius of the circle.
The law of areas can be understood as a consequence of  conservation of angular momentum whch is valid for any central force .A central force is such that  the force on the planet is along the vector joining the Sun and the planet.Let the Sun be at the origin and let the position and momentum of the planet be denoted by r and p  respectively.Then the area swept out by the planet of mass m in time interval ∆t is (Fig.
where v is the velocity,  L is the angular momentum equal  to   ( r  ×  p).For a central  force, which is directed along r, L is  a constant as the planet goes around.Hence, ∆A /∆t is a constant according to the last equation.This is the law of areas.Gravitation is a central force and hence the law of areas follows.
Johannes Kepler (1571–1630) was a scientist of German origin.He formulated the three laws of planetary motion based on the painstaking observations of Tycho Brahe and coworkers.Kepler himself was an assistant to Brahe and it took him sixteen long years to arrive at the three planetary laws.He is also known as the founder of geometrical optics, being the first to describe what happens to light after it enters a telescope.
Since rA   > rp, vp > vA .
The area SBAC bounded by the ellipse and the radius vectors SB and SC is larger than SBPC in Fig.8.1.From Kepler’s second law, equal areas are swept in equal times.Hence the planet will take a longer time to traverse BAC than CPB.
Legend has it that observing an apple falling from a tree, Newton was inspired to arrive at an universal law of gravitation that led to an explanation of terrestrial  gravitation as well as of Kepler’s laws.
where V is the speed of the moon related to the time period T  by the relation .The time period T is about 27.3 days and Rm was already known then to be about 3.84 × 10­8m.If we substitute these numbers in Eq.(8.3), we get a value of am much smaller than the value of acceleration due to gravity g on the surface of the earth, arising also due to earth’s gravitational attraction.
The angular momentum of the particle is conserved, if the torquedue to the force F on it vanishes.This happens either when F is zero or when F is along r. We are interested in forces which satisfy the latter condition.Central forces satisfy this condition.
A ‘central’ force is always directed towards or away from a fixed point, i.e., along the position vector of the point of application of the force with respect to the fixed point.Further, the magnitude of a central force F depends on r, the distance of the point of application of the force from the fixed point; F = F(r).
In the motion under a central force the angular momentum is always conserved.
(1)	The motion of a particle under the central force is always confined to a plane.
(2)	The position vector of the particle with respect to the centre of the force (i.e.the fixed point) has a constant areal velocity.In other words the position vector sweeps out equal areas in equal times as the particle moves under the influence of the central force.
Try to prove both these results.You may need to know that the areal velocity is given by : dA/dt = ½ r v sin α.
An immediate application of the above discussion can be made to the motion of a planet under the gravitational force of the sun.For convenience the sun may be taken to be so heavy that it is at rest.The gravitational force of the sun on the planet is directed towards the sun.This force also satisfies the requirement F = F(r), since F = G m1m2/r2 where m1and m2 are respectively the masses of the planet and the sun and G is the universal constant of gravitation.The two results (1) and (2) described above, therefore, apply to the motion of the planet.In fact, the result (2) is the well-known second law of Kepler.
Tr is the trejectory of the particle under the central force.At a position P, the force is directed along OP, O is the centre of the force taken as the origin.In time ∆t, the particle moves from P to P′, arc PP′ = ∆s = v ∆t.
This clearly shows that the force due to earth’s gravity decreases with distance.If one assumes that the gravitational force due to the earth decreases in proportion to the inverse square of the distance from the centre of the earth, we will have and we get in agreement with a value of g ≅ 9.8  m s-2 and the value of am from Eq.(8.3).
Every body in the universe attracts every other body with a force which is directly proportional to the product of their masses and inversely proportional to the square of the distance between them.
The quotation is essentially from Newton’s famous treatise  called ‘Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy’ (Principia for short).
where G is the universal gravitational constant, is the unit vector from m1 to m2 and r = r2 – r1 as shown in Fig.8.3.
The  gravitational force is attractive, i.e., the force F is along – r. The force on point mass m1 due to m2 is of course – F by Newton’s third law.Thus, the gravitational force F12 on the body 1 due to 2 and F21 on the body 2 due to 1 are related as F12 = – F21.
Before we can apply Eq.(8.5) to objects under consideration, we have to be careful since the law refers to point masses whereas we deal with extended objects which have finite size.If we have a collection of point masses, the force on any one of them is the vector sum of the gravitational forces exerted by the other point masses as shown in Fig 8.4.
Alternatively, one expects on the basis of symmetry that the resultant force ought to be zero.
For the gravitational force between an extended object (like the earth) and a point mass, Eq.(8.5) is not directly applicable.Each point mass in the extended object will exert a force on the given point mass and these force will not all be in the same direction.We have to add up these forces vectorially  for all the point masses in the extended object to get the total force.This is easily done using calculus.
(1)	The force of attraction between a hollow spherical shell of uniform density and a point mass situated outside is just as if the entire mass of the shell is concentrated at the centre of the shell.
Qualitatively this can be understood as follows: Gravitational forces caused by the various regions of the shell have components along the line joining the point mass to the centre as well as along a direction prependicular to this line.The components prependicular to this line cancel out when summing over all regions of the shell leaving only a resultant force along the line joining the point to the centre.The magnitude of this force works out to be as stated above.
Kepler had formulated his third law by 1619.The announcement of the underlying universal law of gravitation came about seventy years later with the publication in 1687 of Newton’s masterpiece Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica, often simply called thePrincipia.
Around 1685, Edmund Halley (after whom the famous Halley’s comet is named), came to visit Newton at Cambridge and asked him about the nature of the trajectory of a body moving under the influence of an inverse square law.Without hesitation Newton replied that it had to be an ellipse, and further that he had worked it out long ago around 1665 when he was forced to retire to his farm house from Cambridge on account of a plague outbreak.Unfortunately, Newton had lost his papers.Halley prevailed upon Newton to produce his work in book form and agreed to bear the cost of publication.Newton accomplished this feat in eighteen months of superhuman effort.The Principia is a singular scientific masterpiece and in the words of Lagrange it is “the greatest production of the human mind.” The Indian born astrophysicist and Nobel laureate S. Chandrasekhar spent ten years writing a treatise on the Principia.His book, Newton’s Principia for the Common Reader brings into sharp focus the beauty, clarity and breath taking economy of Newton’s methods.
(2)	The force of attraction due to a hollow spherical shell of uniform density, on a point mass situated inside it is zero.
Qualitatively, we can again understand this result.Various regions of the spherical shell attract the point mass inside it in various directions.These forces cancel each other completely.
The value of the gravitational constant G entering the Universal law of gravitation  can be determined experimentally and this was first done by English scientist Henry Cavendish in 1798.
The bar AB has two small lead spheres attached at its ends.The bar is suspended from a rigid support by a fine wire.Two large lead spheres are brought close to the small ones but on opposite sides as shown.The big spheres attract the nearby small ones by equal and opposite force as shown.There is no net force on the bar but only a torque which is clearly equal to F times the length of the bar,where F is the force of attraction between a big sphere and its neighbouring small sphere.Due to this torque, the suspended wire  gets twisted till such time as the restoring torque of the wire equals the gravitational torque .If θ is the angle of twist of the suspended wire, the restoring torque is proportional to θ, equal to τθ.Where τ is the restoring couple per unit angle of twist.τ can be measured independently e.g.by applying a known torque and measuring the angle of twist.The gravitational force between the spherical balls is the same as if their masses are concentrated at their centres.Thus if d is the separation between the centres of the big and its neighbouring small ball, M and m their masses, the gravitational force between the big sphere and its neighouring small ball is.
Observation of θ thus enables one to calculate G from this equation.
The earth can be imagined to be a sphere made of a large number of concentric spherical shells with the smallest one at the centre and the largest one at its surface.A point outside the earth  is obviously outside all the shells.Thus, all the shells exert a gravitational force at the point outside just as if their masses are concentrated at their common centre according to the result stated in section 8.3.The total mass of all the shells combined is just the mass of the earth.Hence, at a point outside the earth, the gravitational force is just as if its entire mass of the earth is concentrated at its centre.
For a point inside the earth, the situation is different.This is illustrated in Fig.8.7.
Again consider the earth  to be made up of concentric shells as before and a point mass m situated at a distance r from the centre.The point  P lies outside the sphere of radius r.  For the shells of radius greater than r, the point P lies inside.Hence according to result stated in the last section, they exert no gravitational force on mass m kept at P.  The shells with radius ≤ r make up a sphere of radius r for which the point P lies on the surface.This smaller sphere therefore exerts a force on a mass m at P as if its mass Mr is concentrated at the centre.
We assume that the entire earth is of uniform density and hence its mass is  where ME is the mass of the earth RE is its radius and ρ is the density.
If the mass m is situated on the surface of earth, then  r = RE and the gravitational force on it is, from Eq.
The acceleration experienced by the mass m, which is usually denoted by the symbol g is related to F by Newton’s 2nd law by relation F = mg.
Acceleration g is readily measurable.RE is a known quantity.The measurement of G by Cavendish’s experiment (or otherwise), combined with knowledge of g and RE enables one to estimate ME from Eq.(8.12).This is the reason why there is a popular statement regarding Cavendish : “Cavendish weighed the earth”.
Consider a point mass m at a height h above the surface of the earth as shown in Fig.8.8(a).The radius of the earth is denoted by  RE .Since this point is outside the earth, its distance from the centre of the earth is (RE + h ).If F (h) denoted the magnitude of the force on the point mass m , we get from Eq.
This is clearly less than the value of g on the surface of earth :  For we can expand the RHS of Eq.
Now, consider a point mass m at a depth d below the surface of the earth (Fig.8.8(b)), so that its distance from the centre of the earth is  as shown in the figure.The earth can be thought of as being composed of a smaller sphere of radius  (RE  – d )  and a spherical shell of thickness d.  The force on m due to the outer shell of thickness  d is zero because the result quoted in the previous section.As far as the smaller  sphere of radius  ( RE  – d  ) is concerned, the point mass is outside it and hence according to the result quoted earlier, the force due to this smaller sphere is just as if the entire mass of the smaller sphere is concentrated at the centre.
Since  mass of a sphere is proportional to be cube of its radius.
Thus, as we go down below earth’s surface, the acceleration due gravity decreases by a factor The remarkable thing about acceleration due to earth’s gravity is that it is maximum on its surface decreasing whether you go up or down.
We had discussed earlier the notion of potential energy as being the energy stored in the body at its given position.If the position of the particle changes on account of forces acting on it, then the change in its potential energy is just the amount of work done on the body by the force.As we had discussed earlier, forces for which the work done is independent of the path are the conservative forces.
The force of gravity is a conservative force and we can calculate the potential energy of a body arising out of this force, called the gravitational potential energy.Consider points close to the surface of earth, at distances from the surface much smaller than the radius of the earth.In such cases, the force of gravity is practically a constant equal to mg, directed towards the centre of the earth.
The work done in moving the particle is just the difference of potential energy between its final and initial positions.Observe that the constant Wo cancels out in Eq.(8.22).Setting  h = 0 in the last equation, we get   W ( h = 0 ) =  Wo..h = 0 means points on the surface of the earth.Thus,  Wo  is the  potential energy on the surface of the earth.
If we consider points at arbitrary distance from the surface of the earth, the result just derived is not valid since the assumption that the gravitational force mg is a constant is no longer valid.
where ME = mass of earth, m = mass of the particle and r its distance from the centre of the earth.If we now calculate the work done in lifting a particle from r = r1 to r = r2 (r2 > r1) along a vertical path, we get instead of Eq.
so that once again W12 = W(r2) – W(r1).Setting   r = infinity in the last equation, we get W ( r = infinity ) =   W1 .Thus,  W1  is the potential energy at infinity.One should note that only the difference of potential energy between two points has a definite meaning  from Eqs.(8.22) and (8.24).One conventionally sets  W1 equal to zero, so that the potential energy at a point is just the amount of work done in displacing the particle from infinity to that point.
We have  calculated the potential energy at a point of a particle  due to gravitational forces on it due to the earth and it is proportional to the mass of the particle.The gravitational potential due to the gravitational force of the earth is defined as the potential energy of  a particle of unit mass at that point.
It should be noted that an isolated system of particles will have the total potential energy that equals the sum of energies (given by the above equation) for all possible pairs of its constituent particles.This is an example of the application of the superposition principle.
If a stone is thrown by hand, we see it falls back to the earth.Of course using machines we can shoot an object with much greater speeds and with greater and greater initial speed, the object scales higher and higher heights.
The principle of conservation of energy helps us to answer this question.Suppose the object did reach infinity and that its speed there was Vf.The energy of an object is the sum of potential and kinetic energy.As before W1 denotes that gravitational potential energy of the object at infinity.
Earth satellites are objects which revolve around the earth.Their motion is very similar to the motion of planets around the Sun and hence Kepler’s laws of planetary motion are equally applicable to them.In particular, their orbits around the earth are circular or elliptic.Moon is the only natural satellite of the earth with a near circular orbit with a time period of approximately 27.3 days which is also roughly equal to the rotational period of the moon about its own axis.Since, 1957, advances in technology have enabled many countries including India to launch artificial earth satellites for practical use in fields like telecommunication, geophysics and meteorology.
We will consider a satellite in a circular orbit of a distance (RE + h) from the centre of the earth, where RE = radius of the earth.
We note that the orbits of all planets except Mercury, Mars and Pluto* are very close to being circular.For example, the ratio of the semi-minor to semi-major axis for our Earth is, b/a = 0.99986.
The moon is a satellite of the Earth.From the derivation of Kepler’s third law [see Eq.
Both methods yield almost the same answer, the difference between them being less than 1%.
The total energy of an circularly orbiting satellite is thus negative, with the potential energy being negative but twice is magnitude of the positive kinetic energy.
When the orbit of a satellite becomes elliptic, both the K.E.and P.E.vary from point to point.The total energy which remains constant is negative as in the circular orbit case.This is what we expect, since as we have discussed before if the total energy is positive or zero, the object escapes to infinity.Satellites are always at finite distance from the earth and hence their energies cannot be positive or zero.
The kinetic energy is reduced and it mimics ∆E, namely,  ∆K = Kf – Ki = – 3.13 × 109 J.
An interesting phenomenon arises if in we arrange the value of (RE+ h)  such that T in Eq.(8.37) becomes equal to 24 hours.If the circular orbit is in the equatorial plane of the earth, such a satellite, having the same period as the period of rotation of the earth about its own axis would appear stationery viewed from a point on earth.
and for T = 24 hours, h works out to be 35800 km.which is  much larger than RE.Satellites in a circular orbits around the earth in the equatorial plane with T = 24 hours are called Geostationery Satellites.Clearly, since the earth rotates with the same period, the satellite would appear fixed from any point on earth.It takes very powerful rockets to throw up a satellite to such large heights above the earth but this has been done in view of the several benefits of many practical applications.
A strip on earth’s surface (shown shaded) is visible from the satellite during one cycle.For the next revolution of the satellite, the earth has rotated a little on its axis so that an adjacent strip becomes visible.
It is known that electromagnetic waves above a certain frequency are not reflected from ionosphere.Radio waves used for radio broadcast which are in the frequency range 2 MHz to 10 MHz, are below the critical frequency.They are therefore reflected by the ionosphere.
India started its space programme in 1962 when Indian National Committee for Space Research was set up by the Government of India which was superseded by the Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) in 1969.ISRO identified the role and importance of space technology in nation’s development and bringing space to the service of the common man.India launched its first low orbit satellite Aryabhata in 1975, for which the launch vehicle was provided by the erstwhile Soviet Union.ISRO started employing its indigenous launching vehicle in 1979 by sending Rohini series of satellites into space from its main launch site at Satish Dhawan Space Center, Sriharikota, Andhra Pradesh.The tremendous progress in India’s space programme has made ISRO one of the six largest space agencies in the world.ISRO develops and delivers application specific satellite products and tools for broadcasts, communication, weather forecasts, disaster management tools, Geographic Information System, cartography, navigation, telemedicine, dedicated distance education satellite etc.In order to achieve complete self-reliance in these applications, cost effective and reliable Polar Satellite Launch Vehicle (PSLV) was developed in early 1990s.PSLV has thus become a favoured carrier for satellites of various countries, promoting unprecedented international collaboration.In 2001, the Geosynchronous Satellite Launch Vehicle (GSLV) was developed for launching heavier and more demanding Geosynchronous communication satellites.Various research centers and autonomous institutions for remote sensing, astronomy and astrophysics, atmospheric sciences and space research are functioning under the aegis of the Department of Space, Government of India.Success of lunar (Chandrayaan) and inter planetary (Mangalyaan) missions along with other scientific projects has been landmark achievements of ISRO.Future endeavors of ISRO include human space flight projects, the development of heavy lift launchers, reusable launch vehicles, semi-cryogenic engines, single and two stage to orbit (SSTO and TSTO) vehicles, development and use of composite materials for space application etc.In 1984 Rakesh Sharma became the first Indian to go into outer space aboard in a USSR spaceship.
Thus radio waves broadcast from an antenna can be received at points far away where the direct wave fail to reach on account of the curvature of the earth.Waves used in television broadcast or other forms of communication have much higher frequencies and thus cannot be received beyond the line of sight.A Geostationery satellite, appearing fixed above the broadcasting station can however receive these signals and broadcast them back to a wide area on earth.The INSAT  group of satellites sent up by India are one such group of Geostationary satellites widely used for telecommunications in India.
Another class of satellites are called the Polar satellites (Fig.8.11).These are low altitude (h ≈  500 to 800 km) satellites, but they go around the poles of the earth in a north-south direction whereas the earth rotates around its axis in an east-west direction.Since its time period is around 100 minutes it crosses any altitude many times a day.However, since its height h above the earth is about  500-800 km, a camera fixed on it can view only  small strips of the earth in one orbit.Adjacent strips are viewed in the next orbit, so that in effect the whole earth can be viewed strip by strip during the entire day.These satellites can view polar and equatorial regions at close distances with good resolution.Information gathered from such satellites is extremely useful for remote sensing, meterology  as well as for environmental studies of the earth.
Weight of an object is the force with which the earth attracts it.We are conscious of our own weight when we stand on a surface, since the surface exerts a force opposite to our weight to keep us at rest.The same principle holds good when we measure the weight of an object by a spring balance hung from a fixed point e.g.the ceiling.The object would fall down unless it is subject to a force opposite to gravity.This is exactly what the spring exerts on the object.This is because  the spring is  pulled down a little by the gravitational pull of the object and in turn the spring exerts a force on the object vertically upwards.
Now, imagine that the top end of the balance is no longer held fixed to the top ceiling of the room.Both ends of the spring as well as the object move with identical acceleration g.  The spring is not stretched and does not exert any upward force on the object which is moving down with acceleration g due to gravity.The reading recorded in the spring balance is zero since the spring is not stretched at all.If the object were a human being, he or she will not feel his weight since there is no upward force on him.Thus, when an object is in free fall, it is weightless and this phenomenon is usually called the phenomenon of weightlessness.
In a satellite around the earth, every part and parcel of the satellite has an acceleration towards the centre of the earth which is exactly the value of earth’s acceleration due to gravity at that position.Thus in the satellite everything inside it is in a state of free fall.This is just as if we were falling towards the earth from a height.Thus, in a manned satellite, people inside experience no gravity.Gravity for us defines the vertical direction and thus for them there are no horizontal or vertical directions, all directions are the same.Pictures of astronauts floating in a satellite show this fact.
where G is the universal gravitational constant, which has the value  6.672 ×10–11 N m2 kg–2.
where the symbol ‘Σ’ stands for summation.
(b)	The radius vector drawn from the Sun to a planet sweeps out equal areas in equal time intervals.This follows from the fact that the force of gravitation on the planet is central and hence angular momentum is conserved.
where Ms is the mass of the Sun.Most planets have nearly circular orbits about the Sun.For elliptical orbits, the above equation is valid if R is replaced by the semi-major axis, a.
where V is taken to be zero at r → ∞.The total potential energy for a system of particles is the sum of energies for all pairs of particles, with each pair represented by a term of the form given by above equation.This prescription follows from the principle of superposition.
That is, the total mechanical energy is the sum of the kinetic and potential energies.The total energy is a constant of motion.
with the choice of the arbitrary constant in the potential energy given in the point 5., above.The total energy is negative for any bound system, that is, one in which the orbit 	is closed, such as an elliptical orbit.
and has a value of 11.2 km s–1.
The constant can be given any value.The simplest choice is to take it to be zero.
This choice implies that V →  0 as r →  ∞.Choosing location of zero of the gravitational energy is the same as choosing the arbitrary constant in the potential energy.Note that the gravitational force is not altered by the choice of this constant.
