Motion is common to everything in the universe.We walk, run and ride a bicycle.Even when we are sleeping, air moves into and out of our lungs and blood flows in arteries and veins.We see leaves falling from trees and water flowing down a dam.Automobiles and planes carry people from one place to the other.The earth rotates once every twenty-four hours and revolves round the sun once in a year.The sun itself is in motion in the Milky Way, which is again moving within its local group of galaxies.
Motion is change in position of an object with time.How does the position change with time ?In this chapter, we shall learn how to describe motion.For this, we develop the concepts of velocity and acceleration.We shall confine ourselves to the study of motion of objects along a straight line, also known as rectilinear motion.For the case of rectilinear motion with uniform acceleration, a set of simple equations can be obtained.Finally, to understand the relative nature of motion, we introduce the concept of relative velocity.
In our discussions, we shall treat the objects in motion as point objects.This approximation is valid so far as the size of the object is much smaller than the distance it moves in a reasonable duration of time.In a good number of situations in real-life, the size of objects can be neglected and they can be considered as point-like objects without much error.
In Kinematics, we study ways to describe motion without going into the causes of motion.What causes motion described in this chapter and the next chapter forms the subject matter of Chapter 5.
Earlier you learnt that motion is change in position of an object with time.In order to specify position, we need to use a reference point and a set of axes.It is convenient to choose a rectangular coordinate system consisting of three mutually perpenducular axes, labelled  X-, Y-, and Z- axes.The point of intersection of these three axes is called origin (O) and serves as the reference point.The coordinates (x, y. z) of an object describe the position of the object with respect to this coordinate system.To measure time, we position a clock in this system.This coordinate system along with a clock constitutes a frame of reference.
If one or more coordinates of an object change with time, we say that the object is in motion.Otherwise, the object is said to be at rest with respect to this frame of reference.
The choice of a set of axes in a frame of reference depends upon the situation.For example, for describing motion in one dimension, we need only one axis.To describe motion in two/three dimensions, we need a set of two/three axes.
Description of an event depends on the frame of reference chosen for the description.For example, when you say that a car is moving on a road, you are describing the car with respect to a frame of reference attached to you or to the ground.But with respect to a frame of reference attached with a person sitting in the car, the car is at rest.
To describe motion along a straight line, we can choose an axis, say X-axis, so that it coincides with the path of the object.We then measure the position of the object with reference to a conveniently chosen origin, say O, as shown in Fig.3.1.Positions to the right of O are taken as positive and to the left of O, as negative.Following this convention, the position coordinates of point P and Q in Fig.3.1 are +360 m and +240 m. Similarly, the position coordinate of point R is –120 m.
Consider the motion of a car along a straight line.We choose the x-axis such that it coincides with the path of the car’s motion and origin of the axis as the point from where the car started moving, i.e.the car was at x = 0 at t = 0 (Fig.3.1).Let P, Q and R represent the positions of the car at different instants of time.Consider two cases of motion.In the first case, the car moves from O to P.  Then the distance moved by the car is OP = +360 m. This distance is called the path length  traversed by the car.In the second case, the car moves from O to P and then moves back from P to Q.During this course of motion, the path length traversed is OP + PQ = + 360 m + (+120 m) = + 480 m.  Path length is a scalar quantity — a quantity that has a magnitude only and no direction (see Chapter 4).
It is useful to define another quantity displacement  as  the  change  in position.Let x1 and x2 be the positions of an object at time t1 and t2.
If   x2 > x1, ∆x is positive; and if x2 < x1, ∆x is negative.
Displacement has both magnitude and direction.Such quantities are represented by vectors.You will read about vectors in the next chapter.Presently, we are dealing with motion along a straight line (also called rectilinear motion) only.In one-dimensional motion, there are only two directions (backward and forward, upward and downward) in which an object can move, and these two directions can easily be specified by + and – signs.
The displacement has a magnitude of 360 m and is directed in the positive x direction as indicated by the + sign.Similarly, the displacement of the car from P to Q is 240 m – 360 m = – 120 m. The negative sign indicates the direction of displacement.Thus, it is not necessary to use vector notation for discussing motion of objects in one-dimension.
The magnitude of displacement may or may not be equal to the path length traversed by an object.For example, for motion of the car from O to P, the path length is  +360 m and the displacement is +360 m. In this case, the magnitude of displacement (360 m) is equal to the path length (360 m).But consider the motion of the car from O to P and back to Q.In this case, the path length = (+360 m) + (+120 m) = + 480 m. However, the displacement = (+240 m) – (0 m) =  + 240 m.  Thus, the magnitude of displacement (240 m) is not equal to the path length (480 m).
The magnitude of the displacement for a course of motion may be zero but the corresponding path length is not zero.For example, if the car starts from O, goes to P and then returns to O, the final position coincides with the initial position and the displacement is zero.However, the path length of this journey is OP + PO = 360 m +  360 m = 720 m.
Motion of an object can be represented by a position-time graph as you have already learnt about it.Such a graph is a powerful tool to represent and analyse different aspects of motion of an object.For motion along a straight line, say X-axis, only x-coordinate varies with time and we have an x-t graph.Let us first consider the simple case in which an object is stationary, e.g.a car standing still at x = 40 m.  The position-time graph is a straight line parallel to the time axis, as shown in Fig.3.2(a).
If an object moving along the straight line  covers equal distances in equal intervals of time, it is said to be in uniform motion along a straight line.Fig.3.2(b) shows the position-time graph of such a motion.
Now, let us consider the motion of a car that starts from rest at time t = 0 s from the origin O and picks up speed till t = 10 s and thereafter moves with uniform speed till t = 18 s. Then the brakes are applied and the car stops at t = 20 s and x = 296 m. The position-time graph for this case is shown in Fig.3.3.We shall refer to this graph in our discussion in the following sections.
When an object is in motion, its position changes with time.But how fast is the position changing with time and in what direction?To describe this, we define the quantity average velocity.
where x2  and x1 are the positions of the object at time t2and  t1, respectively.Here the bar over the symbol for velocity is a standard notation used to indicate an average quantity.The SI unit for velocity is m/s or m s–1, although km h–1 is used in many everyday applications.
Like displacement, average velocity is also a vector quantity.But as explained earlier, for motion in a straight line, the directional aspect of the vector can be taken care of by + and – signs and we do not have to use the vector notation for velocity in this chapter.
Consider the motion of the car in Fig.3.3.The portion of the x-t graph between t = 0 s and t = 8 s is blown up and shown in Fig.3.4.
Geometrically, this is the slope of the straight line P1P2 connecting the initial position P1 to the final position P2  as shown in Fig.3.4.
The average velocity can be positive or negative depending upon the sign of the displacement.It is zero if the displacement is zero.Fig.3.5 shows the x-t graphs for an object, moving with positive velocity (Fig.3.5a), moving with negative velocity (Fig.3.5b)  and at rest (Fig.3.5c).
Average velocity as defined above involves only the displacement of the object.We have seen earlier that the magnitude of displacement may be different from the actual path length.To describe the rate of motion over the actual path, we introduce another quantity called average speed.
Average speed has obviously the same unit       (m s–1) as that of velocity.But it does not tell us in what direction an object is moving.Thus, it is always positive (in contrast to the average velocity which can be positive or negative).If the motion of an object is along a straight line and in the same direction, the magnitude of displacement is equal to the total path length.In that case, the magnitude of average velocity is equal to the average speed.This is not always the case, as you will see in the following example.
Thus, in this case the average speed is equal to the magnitude of the average velocity.
Thus, in this case the average speed is not equal to the magnitude of the average velocity.This happens because the motion here involves change in direction so that the path length is greater than the magnitude of displacement.This shows that speed is, in general, greater than the magnitude of the velocity.
If the car in Example 3.1 moves from O to P and comes back to O in the same time interval, average speed is 20 m/s but the average velocity is zero !
The average velocity tells us how fast an object has been moving over a given time interval but does not tell us how fast it moves at different instants of time during that interval.For this, we define instantaneous velocity or simply velocity v at an instant t.
The velocity at an instant is defined as the limit of the average velocity as the time interval ∆t becomes infinitesimally small.
where the symbol stands for the operation of taking limit as  ∆t → 0 of the quantity on its right.In the language of calculus, the quantity on the right hand side of Eq.(3.3a) is the differential coefficient of x with respect to t and is denoted by   (see Appendix 3.1).It is the rate of change of position with respect to time, at that instant.
We can use Eq.(3.3a) for obtaining the value of velocity at an instant either graphically or numerically.Suppose that we want to obtain graphically the value of velocity at time  t = 4 s  (point P) for the motion of the car represented in Fig.3.3.The figure has been redrawn in Fig.3.6 choosing different scales to facilitate the calculation.Let us take ∆t = 2 s centred at              t = 4 s. Then, by the definition of the average velocity, the slope of line P1P2  ( Fig.3.6) gives the value of average velocity over the interval   3 s to 5 s.  Now, we decrease the value of ∆t from 2 s to 1 s.  Then line P1P2 becomes Q1Q2   and its slope gives the value of the average velocity over the interval 3.5 s to 4.5 s. In the limit ∆t → 0, the line P1P2 becomes tangent to the position-time curve at the point P and the velocity at t = 4 s is given by the slope of the tangent at that point.It is difficult to show this process graphically.But if we use numerical method to obtain the value of the velocity, the meaning of the limiting process becomes clear.For the graph shown in Fig.3.6, x = 0.08 t3.Table 3.1 gives the value of ∆x/∆t calculated for ∆t equal to 2.0 s, 1.0 s, 0.5 s, 0.1 s and 0.01 s centred at t = 4.0 s. The second and third columns give the value of t1=   and  and the fourth and the fifth columns give the corresponding values of x, i.e.x (t1) = 0.08 t13 and x (t2) = 0.08 t23.The sixth column lists the difference ∆x = x (t2) – x (t1) and the last column gives the ratio of ∆x and ∆t, i.e.the average velocity corresponding to the value of ∆t listed in the first column.
We see from Table 3.1 that as we decrease the value of ∆t from 2.0 s to 0.010 s, the value of the average velocity approaches the limiting value 3.84 m s–1 which is the value of velocity at t = 4.0 s, i.e.the value of dx/dt at t = 4.0 s. In this manner, we can calculate velocity at each instant for motion of the car shown in Fig.3.3.For this case, the variation of velocity with time is found to be as shown in Fig.3.7.
The graphical method for the determination of the instantaneous velocity is always not a convenient method.For this, we must carefully plot the position–time graph and calculate the value of average velocity as ∆t becomes smaller and smaller.It is easier to calculate the value of velocity at different instants if we have data of positions at different instants or exact expression for the position as a function of time.Then, we calculate ∆x/∆t from the data for decreasing the value of ∆t and find the limiting value as we have done in Table 3.1 or use differential calculus for the given expression and calculate dx/dt at different instants as done in the following example.
At   t = 0 s,      v = 0 m s–1   and at   t = 2.0 s,              v = 10 m s-1 .
From Fig.3.7, we note that during the period     t =10 s to 18 s the velocity is constant.Between period t =18 s to t = 20 s, it is uniformly decreasing  and  during  the  period t = 0 s to     t = 10 s, it is increasing.Note that for uniform motion, velocity is the same as the average velocity at all instants.
Instantaneous speed or simply speed is the magnitude of velocity.For example, a velocity of + 24.0 m s–1 and a velocity of – 24.0 m s–1 — both have an associated speed of 24.0 m s-1.It should be noted that though average speed over a finite interval of time is greater or equal to the magnitude of the average velocity, instantaneous speed at an instant is equal to the magnitude of the instantaneous velocity at that instant.Why so ?
The velocity of an object, in general, changes during its course of motion.How to describe this change?Should it be described as the rate of change in velocity with distance or with time ?This was a problem even in Galileo’s time.It was first thought that this change could be described by the rate of change of velocity with distance.But, through his studies of motion of freely falling objects and motion of objects on an inclined plane, Galileo concluded that the rate of change of velocity with time is a constant of motion for all objects in free fall.On the other hand, the change in velocity with distance is not constant – it decreases with the increasing distance of fall.This led to the concept of acceleration as the rate of change of velocity with time.
where v2 and v1 are the instantaneous velocities or simply velocities at time  t2 and t1 .It is the average change of velocity per unit time.The SI unit of acceleration is m s–2 .
On a plot of velocity versus time, the average acceleration is the slope of the straight line connecting the points corresponding to (v2, t2) and (v1, t1).The average acceleration for     velocity-time graph shown in Fig.
The acceleration at an instant is the slope of the tangent to the v–t curve at that instant.For the v–t curve shown in  Fig.3.7, we can obtain acceleration at every instant of time.The resulting a – t curve is shown in Fig.3.8.We see that the acceleration is nonuniform over the period  0 s to 10 s. It is zero between 10 s and 18 s and is constant with value -12 m s–2  between 18 s and 20 s. When the acceleration is uniform, obviously, it equals the average acceleration over that period.
Since velocity is a quantity having both magnitude and direction, a change in velocity may involve either or both of these factors.Acceleration, therefore, may result from a change in speed (magnitude), a change in direction or changes in both.Like velocity, acceleration can also be positive, negative or zero.Position-time graphs for motion with positive, negative and zero acceleration are shown in Figs.3.9 (a), (b) and (c), respectively.Note that the graph curves upward for positive acceleration; downward for negative acceleration and it is a straight line for zero acceleration.As an exercise, identify in Fig.3.3, the regions of the curve that correspond to these three cases.
Although acceleration can vary with time, our study in this chapter will be restricted to motion with constant acceleration.In this case, the average acceleration equals the constant value of acceleration during the interval.
Let us see how velocity-time graph looks like for some simple cases.Fig.
(a)	An object is moving in a positive direction with a positive acceleration, for example the motion of the car in  Fig.3.3 between t = 0 s and t = 10 s.
(b)	An object is moving in positive direction with a negative acceleration, for example, motion of the car in Fig 3.3 between t = 18 s and 20 s.
(c)	An object is moving in negative direction with a negative acceleration, for example the motion of a car moving from O in Fig.3.1 in negative x-direction with increasing speed.
(d)	An object is moving in positive direction till time t1, and then turns back with the same negative acceleration, for example the motion of a car from point O to point Q in Fig.3.1 till time t1 with decreasing speed and turning back and moving with the same negative acceleration.
An interesting feature of a velocity-time graph for any moving object is that the area under the curve represents the displacement over a given time interval.A general proof of this statement requires use of calculus.We can, however, see that it is true for the simple case of an object moving with constant velocity u.Its velocity-time graph is as shown in Fig.3.11.
The v-t curve is a straight line parallel to the time axis and the area under it between t = 0 and t = T is the area of the rectangle of height u and base T. Therefore, area = u × T = uT which is the displacement in this time interval.How come in this case an area is equal to a distance?Think!Note the dimensions of quantities on the two coordinate axes, and you will arrive at the answer.
Note that the x-t, v-t, and a-t graphs shown in several figures in this chapter have sharp kinks at some points implying that the functions are not differentiable at these points.In any realistic situation, the functions will be differentiable at all points and the graphs will be smooth.
What this means physically is that acceleration and velocity cannot change values abruptly at an instant.Changes are always continuous.
For uniformly accelerated motion, we can derive some simple equations that relate displacement (x), time taken (t), initial velocity (v0), final velocity (v) and acceleration (a).
This relation is graphically represented in Fig.3.12.
As explained in the previous section, the area under v-t curve represents the displacement.
Equations (3.9a) and  (3.9b) mean that the object has undergone displacement x with an average velocity equal to the arithmetic average of the initial and final velocities.
From Eq.(3.6), t = (v – v0)/a.Substituting this in Eq.
This equation can also be obtained by substituting the value of t from Eq.(3.6) into Eq.(3.8).
connecting five quantities v0,  v, a, t and x.These are kinematic equations of rectilinear motion for constant acceleration.
The set of Eq.(3.11a) were obtained by assuming that at t = 0, the position of the particle, x is 0.We can obtain a more general equation if we take  the  position coordinate at t = 0 as non-zero, say x0.Then Eqs.
The advantage of this method is that it can be used for motion with non-uniform acceleration also.
Now, we shall use these equations to some important cases.
Solving,  we get, (y – y0) = 20 m.
(b) We can solve this part of the problem in two ways.Note carefully the methods used.
FIRST METHOD :  In the first method, we split the path in two parts : the upward motion  (A to B) and the downward motion (B to C) and calculate the corresponding time taken t1 and t2.
This is the time in going from A to B.From B, or the point of  the maximum height, the ball falls freely under the acceleration due to gravity.The ball is moving in negative y direction.
Therefore, the total time taken by the ball before it hits the ground = t1 + t2  =  2 s + 3 s = 5 s.
vo = 20 m s-1,	a  = –10m s–2,  t  =  ?
Note that the second method is better since we do not have to worry about the path of the motion as the motion is under constant acceleration.
We assume that the motion is in y-direction, more correctly in –y-direction because we choose upward direction as positive.
The object is released from rest at y = 0.
These equations give the velocity and the distance travelled as a function of time and also the variation of velocity with distance.The variation of acceleration, velocity, and distance, with time have been plotted in Fig.3.14(a), (b) and (c).
(b) Variation of velocity with time.
Using this equation, we can calculate the position of the object after different time intervals, 0, τ, 2τ,  3τ… which are given in second column of Table 3.2.If we take (–1/ 2) gτ2 as y0 — the position coordinate after first time interval τ, then third column gives the positions in the unit of yo.The fourth column gives the distances traversed in successive τs.We find that the distances are in the simple ratio 1: 3: 5: 7: 9: 11… as  shown  in the last column.This  law was established by Galileo Galilei (1564-1642) who was the first to make quantitative studies of free fall.
Thus, the stopping distance is proportional to the square of the initial velocity.Doubling the initial velocity increases the stopping distance by a factor of 4 (for the same deceleration).
For  the car of a particular make, the braking distance was found to be 10 m, 20 m, 34 m and 50 m corresponding to velocities of 11, 15, 20 and 25 m/s which are nearly consistent with the above formula.
Stopping distance is an important factor considered in setting speed limits, for example, in school zones.
You can measure your reaction time by a simple experiment.Take a ruler and ask your friend to drop it vertically through the gap between your thumb and forefinger (Fig.3.15).After you catch it, find the distance d travelled by the ruler.In a particular case, d was found to be 21.0 cm.Estimate reaction time.
You must be familiar with the experience of travelling in a train and being overtaken by another train moving in the same direction as you are.While that train must be travelling faster than you to be able to pass you, it does seem slower to you than it would be to someone standing on the ground and watching both the trains.In case both the trains have the same velocity with respect to the ground, then to you the other train would seem to be not moving at all.To understand such observations, we now introduce the concept of relative velocity.
Consider two objects A and B moving uniformly with average velocities vA and vB in one dimension, say along x-axis.(Unless otherwise specified, the velocities mentioned in this chapter are measured with reference to the ground).
Equation (3.13) is easily interpreted.It tells us that as seen from object A, object B has a velocity vB – vA because the displacement from A to B changes steadily by the amount vB – vA in each unit of time.
(a) If vB = vA, vB – vA  = 0.Then, from Eq.(3.13), xB (t) – xA (t) = xB (0) – xA (0).Therefore, the two objects stay at a constant distance (xB (0) – xA (0)) apart, and their position–time graphs are straight lines parallel to each other as shown in Fig.3.16.The relative velocity vAB or vBA is zero in this case.
(b) If vA > vB, vB – vA is negative.One graph is steeper than the other and they meet at a common point.For example, suppose vA  = 20 m s-1 and xA (0) = 10 m; and vB = 10 m s-1, xB (0) = 40 m; then the time at which they meet is t = 3 s (Fig.3.17).At this instant they are both at a position xA (t) = xB (t) = 70 m. Thus, object A overtakes object B at this time.In this case,vBA = 10 m s–1 – 20 m s–1 = – 10 m s–1= – vAB.
(c) Suppose vA and vB are of opposite signs.For example, if in the above example object A is moving with 20 m s–1 starting at  xA(0) = 10 m and object B is moving with – 10 m s–1 starting at xB (0) = 40 m,  the two objects meet at t = 1 s (Fig.3.18).The velocity of B relative to A, vBA = [–10 – (20)] m s–1 = –30 m s–1 = – vAB.In this case, the magnitude of vBA or vAB ( = 30 m s–1) is greater than the magnitude of velocity of A or that of B.If the objects under consideration are two trains, then for a person sitting on either of the two, the other train seems to go very fast.
Note that Eq.(3.14) are valid even if vA and vB represent instantaneous velocities.
(c)	velocity of a monkey running on the roof of the train A against its motion (with a velocity of 18 km h–1 with respect to the train A) as observed by a man standing on the ground ?
Relative velocity of B with respect to A = vB – vA= – 40 m s–1 , i.e.the train B appears to A to move with a speed of 40 m s–1 from north to south.
Relative velocity of ground with respect to B = 0 – vB = 25 m s–1.
In (c), let the velocity of the monkey with respect to ground be vM.
vMA = vM – vA = –18 km h–1 =–5 ms–1.Therefore, vM = (15 – 5) m s–1 = 10 m s–1.
On an x-t graph, the average velocity over a time interval is the slope of the line connecting the initial and final positions corresponding to that interval.
The average speed of an object is greater or equal to the magnitude of the average velocity over a given time interval.
The velocity at a particular instant is equal to the slope of the tangent drawn on         position-time graph at that instant.
The acceleration of an object at a particular time is the slope of the velocity-time graph at that instant of time.For uniform motion, acceleration is zero and the x-t graph is a straight line inclined to the time axis and the v-t graph is a straight line parallel to the time axis.For motion with uniform acceleration, x-t graph is a parabola while the v-t graph is a straight line inclined to the time axis.
if the position of the object at time t = 0 is 0.If the particle starts at x = x0 , x in above equations is replaced by (x – x0).
(a)	a railway carriage moving without jerks between two stations.
(b)	a monkey sitting on top of a man cycling smoothly on a circular track.
(c)	a spinning cricket ball that turns sharply on hitting the ground.
(d)	a tumbling beaker that has slipped off the edge of a table.
(e)	(A/B) overtakes (B/A) on the road (once/twice).
(a)	What is the direction of acceleration during the upward motion of the ball ?
(b)	What are the velocity and acceleration of the ball at the highest point of its motion ?
(c)	Choose the x = 0 m and t = 0 s to be the location and time of the ball at its highest point, vertically downward direction to be the positive direction of      x-axis, and give the signs of position, velocity and acceleration of the ball during its upward, and downward motion.
(d)	To what height does the ball rise and after how long does the ball return to the player’s hands ?(Take g = 9.8 m s–2 and neglect air resistance).
(d)	with positive value of acceleration must be speeding up.
(a)	magnitude of displacement (sometimes called distance) over an interval of time, and the total length of path covered by a particle over the same interval;
(b)	magnitude of average velocity over an interval of time, and the average speed over the same interval.[Average speed of a particle over an interval of time is defined as the total path length divided by the time interval].Show in both (a) and (b) that the second quantity is either greater than or equal to the first.When is the equality sign true ?[For simplicity, consider one-dimensional motion only].
(b)	average speed of the man over the interval of time (i) 0 to 30 min, (ii) 0 to         50 min, (iii) 0 to 40 min ?[Note: You will appreciate from this exercise why it is better to define average speed as total path length divided by time, and not as magnitude of average velocity.
(a)	speed of the child running in the direction of motion of the belt ?.
(b)	speed of the child running opposite to the direction of motion of the belt ?
(c)	time taken by the child in (a) and (b) ?
Which of the answers alter if motion is viewed by one of the parents ?
What is the average speed of the particle over the intervals in (a) and (b) ?
(f)	x(t2 ) – x(t1) = area under the v-t curve bounded by the t-axis and the dotted line shown.
Using the concept of ‘differential coefficient’ or ‘derivative’, we can easily define velocity and acceleration.Though you will learn in detail in mathematics about derivatives, we shall introduce this concept in brief in this Appendix so as to facilitate its use in describing physical quantities involved in motion.
Suppose we have a quantity y whose value depends upon a single variable x, and is expressed by an equation defining y as some specific function of x.
This relationship can be visualised by drawing a graph of function y = f (x) regarding y and x as Cartesian coordinates, as shown in Fig.3.30 (a).
Consider the point P on the curve y = f (x) whose coordinates are (x, y) and another point Q where coordinates are (x + ∆x, y + ∆y).
Suppose now that the point Q moves along the curve towards P.  In this process, ∆y and ∆x decrease and approach zero; though their ratio   will not necessarily vanish.What happens to the line PQ as ∆y→ 0, ∆x→ 0.You can see that this line becomes a tangent to the curve at point P as shown in Fig.3.30(b).
The limit of the ratio ∆y/∆x as  ∆x approaches zero is called the derivative of y with respect to x and is written as dy/dx.It represents the slope of the tangent line to the curve y = f (x) at the point (x, y).
Given below are some elementary formulae for derivatives of functions.In these u (x) and v (x) represent arbitrary functions of x, and a and b denote constant quantities that are independent of x.  Derivatives of some common functions are also listed .
You are familiar with the notion of area.The formulae for areas of simple geometrical figures are also known to you.For example, the area of a rectangle is length times breadth and that of a triangle is half of the product of base and height.But how to deal with the problem of determination of area of an irregular figure?The mathematical notion of integral is necessary in connection with such problems.
Let us take a concrete example.Suppose a variable force f (x) acts on a particle in its motion along x - axis from x = a to x = b.The problem is to determine the work done (W) by the force on the particle during the motion.This problem is discussed in detail in Chapter 6.
To calculate the area under this curve  [Fig.3.31  (ii)], let us employ the following trick.Divide the interval on x-axis from a to b into a large number (N) of small intervals: x0(=a) to x1, x1 to x2 ; x2 to x3, ................................ xN-1 to xN (=b).The area under the curve is thus divided into N strips.Each strip is approximately a rectangle, since the variation of  F(x) over a strip is negligible.The area of the ith strip shown [Fig.
where ∆x is the width of the strip which we have taken to be the same for all the strips.You may wonder whether we should put F(xi-1) or the mean of F(xi)  and  F(xi-1) in the above expression.If we take N to be very very large (N→∞ ),  it does not really matter, since then the strip will be so thin that the difference between  F(xi) and F(xi-1)  is vanishingly small.
The limit of this sum as N→∞  is known as the integral of F(x) over x from a to b.
The integral sign ∫ looks like an elongated S, reminding us that it basically is the limit of the sum of an infinite number of terms.
A most significant mathematical fact is that integration is, in a sense, an inverse of differentiation.Suppose we have a function g (x) whose derivative is f (x), i.e.
An integral with lower and upper limits is known as a definite integral.It is a number.Indefinite integral has no limits; it is a function.
As an example, suppose f (x) = x2 and we wish to determine the value of the definite integral from x =1 to x = 2.The function g (x) whose derivative is x2 is x3/3.
Clearly, to evaluate definite integrals, we need to know the corresponding indefinite integrals.
This introduction to differential and integral calculus is not rigorous and is intended to convey to you the basic notions of calculus.
