As mentioned in section 4.2, vectors, by definition, obey the triangle law or equivalently, the parallelogram law of addition.We shall now describe this law of addition using the graphical method.Let us consider two vectors A and B that lie in a plane as shown in Fig.4.4(a).The lengths of the line segments representing these vectors are proportional to the magnitude of the vectors.To find the sum A + B, we place vector B so that its tail is at the head of the vector A, as in Fig.4.4(b).Then, we join the tail of A to the head of B.This line OQ represents a vector R, that is, the sum of the vectors A and B.Since, in this procedure of vector addition, vectors are arranged head to tail, this graphical method is called the head-to-tail method.The two vectors and their resultant form three sides of a triangle, so this method is also known as triangle method of vector addition.If we find the resultant of B + A as in Fig.4.4(c), the same vector R is obtained.
We say that A has been resolved into two component vectors λ a and µ b along a and b respectively.Using this method one can resolve a given vector into two component vectors along a set of two vectors – all the three lie in the same plane.It is convenient to resolve a general vector along the axes of a rectangular coordinate system using vectors of unit magnitude.These are called unit vectors that we discuss now.A unit vector is a vector of unit magnitude and points in a particular direction.It has no dimension and unit.It is used to specify a direction only.
It is shown in Fig 4.5.The vector –B is added to vector A to get R2 = (A – B).The vector R1 = A + B is also shown in the same figure for comparison.We can also use the parallelogram method to find the sum of two vectors.Suppose we have two vectors A and B.To add these vectors, we bring their tails to a common origin O as shown in Fig.4.6(a).Then we draw a line from the head of A parallel to B and another line from the head of B parallel to A to complete a parallelogram OQSP.Now we join the point of the intersection of these two lines to the origin O.The resultant vector R is directed from the common origin O along  the diagonal (OS) of the parallelogram [Fig.4.6(b)].In Fig.4.6(c), the triangle law is used to obtain the resultant of A and B and we see that the two methods yield the same result.Thus, the two methods are equivalent.
In the last chapter we developed the concepts of position, displacement, velocity and acceleration that are needed to describe the motion of an object along a straight line.We found that the directional aspect of these quantities can be taken care of by + and – signs, as in one dimension only two directions are possible.But in order to describe motion of an object in two dimensions (a plane) or three dimensions (space), we need to use vectors to describe the above-mentioned physical quantities.Therefore, it is first necessary to learn the language of vectors.What is a vector?How to add, subtract and multiply vectors ?What is the result of multiplying a vector by a real number ?We shall learn this to enable us to use vectors for defining velocity and acceleration in a plane.We then discuss motion of an object in a plane.As a simple case of motion in a plane, we shall discuss motion with constant acceleration and treat in detail the projectile motion.Circular motion is a familiar class of motion that has a special significance in daily-life situations.We shall discuss uniform circular motion in some detail.
To describe the position of an object moving in a plane, we  need to choose a convenient point, say O as origin.Let P and P′ be the positions of the object at time t and t′, respectively [Fig.4.1(a)].We join O and P by a straight line.Then, OP is the position vector of the object at time t.  An arrow is marked at the head of this line.It is represented by a symbol r, i.e.OP = r.  Point P′ is represented by another position vector, OP′ denoted by r′.The length of the vector r  represents the magnitude of the vector and its direction is the direction in which P lies as seen from O.If the object moves from P to P′, the vector PP′ (with tail at P and tip at P′) is called the displacement vector corresponding to motion from point P (at time t) to point P′ (at time t′).
To represent a vector, we use a bold face type in this book.Thus, a velocity vector can be represented by a symbol v.  Since bold face is difficult to produce, when written by hand, a vector is often represented by an arrow placed over a letter, say .Thus, both v and  represent the velocity vector.The magnitude of a vector is often called its absolute value, indicated by |v| = v.  Thus, a vector is represented by a bold face, e.g.by A, a, p, q, r, ... x, y, with respective magnitudes denoted by light face A, a, p, q, r, ... x, y.
(a) adding any two scalars, (b) adding a scalar to a vector of the same dimensions ,     (c) multiplying any vector by any scalar, (d) multiplying any two scalars, (e) adding any two vectors, (f) adding a component of a vector to the same vector.
Let the angle between position vectors r and r′ be ∆θ.Since the velocity vectors v and v′ are always perpendicular to the position vectors, the angle between them is also ∆θ .Therefore, the triangle CPP′ formed by the position vectors and the triangle GHI formed by the velocity vectors v, v′ and ∆v are similar (Fig.4.19a).Therefore, the ratio of the base-length to side-length for one of the triangles is equal to that of the other triangle.
Let a and b be any two non-zero vectors in a plane with different directions and let A be another vector in the same plane(Fig.4.8).A can be expressed as a sum of two vectors — one obtained by multiplying a by a real number and the other obtained by multiplying b by another real number.To see this, let O and P be the tail and head of the vector A.Then, through O, draw a straight line parallel to a, and through P, a straight line parallel to b.Let them intersect at Q.
where  λ and µ are real numbers.
In physics, we can classify quantities as scalars or vectors.Basically, the difference is that a direction is associated with a vector but not with a scalar.A scalar quantity is a quantity with magnitude only.It is specified completely by a single number, along with the proper unit.Examples are : the distance between two points, mass of an object, the temperature of a body and the time at which a certain event happened.The rules for combining scalars are the rules of ordinary algebra.Scalars can be added, subtracted, multiplied and divided just as the ordinary numbers*.For example, if the length and breadth of a rectangle are 1.0 m and 0.5 m respectively, then its perimeter is the sum of the lengths of the four sides, 1.0 m + 0.5 m +1.0 m + 0.5 m = 3.0 m. The length of each side is a scalar and the perimeter is also a scalar.Take another example: the maximum and minimum temperatures on a particular day are 35.6 °C and 24.2 °C respectively.Then, the difference between the two temperatures is 11.4 °C.Similarly, if a uniform solid cube of aluminium of side 10 cm has a mass of 2.7 kg, then its volume is 10–3 m3 (a scalar) and its density is 2.7×103 kg m–3 (a scalar).
Although the graphical method of adding vectors helps us in visualising the vectors and the resultant vector, it is sometimes tedious and has limited accuracy.It is much easier to add vectors by combining their respective components.
The  factor λ by  which  a vector A is multiplied could be a scalar having its own physical        dimension.Then, the dimension of λ A is the product of the dimensions of λ and A.For example, if we multiply a constant velocity vector by duration (of time), we get a displacement vector.
vx, vy and angle θ are shown in Fig.4.14 for a velocity vector v at point p.
As in the case of velocity, we can understand graphically the limiting process used in defining acceleration on a graph showing the path of the object’s motion.This is shown in Figs.4.15(a) to (d).P represents the position of the object at time t and P1, P2, P3 positions after time ∆t1, ∆t2, ∆t3, respectively (∆t1> ∆t2>∆t3).The velocity vectors at points P, P1, P2, P3 are also shown in Figs.4.15 (a), (b) and (c).In each case of ∆t, ∆v is obtained using the triangle law of vector addition.By definition, the direction of average   acceleration is the same as that of ∆v.We see that as ∆t decreases, the direction of ∆v changes and consequently, the direction of the acceleration changes.Finally, in the limit ∆t g0 [Fig.4.15(d)], the average acceleration becomes the instantaneous acceleration and has the direction as shown.
(a) The magnitude of a vector is always a scalar, (b) each component of a vector is always a scalar, (c) the total path length is always equal to the magnitude of the displacement vector of a particle.
A vector quantity is a quantity that has both a magnitude and a direction and obeys the triangle law of addition or equivalently the parallelogram law of addition.So, a vector is specified by giving its magnitude by a number and its direction.Some physical quantities that are represented by vectors are displacement, velocity, acceleration and force.
What is the physical meaning of a zero vector?Consider the position and displacement vectors in a plane as shown in Fig.4.1(a).Now suppose that an object which is at P at time t, moves to P′ and then comes back to P. Then, what is its displacement?Since the initial and final positions coincide, the displacement is a “null vector”.
Let r and r′ be the position vectors and v and v′ the velocities of the object when it is at point P and P′ as shown in Fig.4.19(a).By definition, velocity at a point is along the tangent at that point in the direction of motion.The velocity vectors v and v′ are as shown in Fig.4.19(a1).∆v is obtained in Fig.4.19 (a2) using the triangle law of vector addition.Since the path is circular, v is perpendicular to r and so is v′ to r′.Therefore, ∆v is perpendicular to ∆r.
These unit vectors are perpendicular to each other.In this text, they are printed in bold face with a cap (^) to distinguish them from other vectors.Since we are dealing with motion in two dimensions in this chapter, we require use of only two unit vectors.
While treating the topic of projectile motion, we have stated that we assume that the air resistance has no effect on the motion of the projectile.You must understand what the statement really means.Friction, force due to viscosity, air resistance are all dissipative forces.In the presence of any of such forces opposing motion, any object will lose some part of its initial energy and consequently, momentum too.Thus, a projectile that traverses a parabolic path would certainly show deviation from its idealised trajectory in the presence of air resistance.It will not hit the ground with the same speed with which it was projected from it.In the absence of air resistance, the x-component of the velocity remains constant and it is only the y-component that undergoes a continuous change.However, in the presence of air resistance, both of these would get affected.That would mean that the range would be less than the one given by Eq.
So far we have considered a vector lying in  an x-y plane.The same procedure can be used to resolve a general vector A into three components along x-, y-, and z-axes in three dimensions.If α, β, and γ are the angles* between A and the x-, y-, and z-axes, respectively [Fig.
Consider a vector A that lies in x-y plane as shown in Fig.4.9(b).We draw lines from the head of A perpendicular to the coordinate axes as in Fig.4.9(b), and get vectors A1 and A2 such that  A1 + A2 = A.
where Ax and Ay are real numbers.
It is important to note that displacement vector is the straight line joining the initial and final positions and does not depend on the actual path undertaken by the object between the two positions.For example, in Fig.4.1(b), given the initial and final positions as P and Q, the displacement vector is the same PQ for different paths of journey, say PABCQ, PDQ, and PBEFQ.Therefore, the magnitude of displacement is either less or equal to the path length of an object between two points.This fact was emphasised in the previous chapter also while discussing motion along a straight line.
This is represented in Fig.4.9(c).The quantities Ax  and Ay  are called x-, and y- components of the vector A.
is a vector, and so is.
As an application of the ideas developed in the previous sections, we consider the motion of a projectile.An object that is in flight after being thrown or projected is called a projectile.Such a projectile might be a football, a cricket ball, a baseball or any other object.The motion of a projectile may be thought of as the result of two separate, simultaneously occurring components of motions.One component is along a horizontal direction without  any acceleration and the other along the vertical direction with constant acceleration due to the force of gravity.It was Galileo who first stated this independency of the horizontal and the vertical components of projectile motion in his Dialogue on the great world systems (1632).
(d) the average speed of a particle (defined as total path length divided by the time taken to cover the path) is either greater or equal to the magnitude of average velocity of the particle over the same interval of time, (e) Three vectors not lying in a plane can never add up to give a null vector.
The unit vectors are vectors of unit magnitude and point in the direction of the x-, y-, and z-axes, respectively in a right-handed coordinate system.
Note carefully the difference between this Example and the Example 4.1.In Example 4.1, the boy experiences the resultant (vector  sum) of two velocities while in this example, the woman experiences the velocity of rain relative to the bicycle (the vector difference of the two velocities).
Multiplying a given vector A by negative numbers, say –1 and –1.5, gives vectors as shown in Fig 4.3(b).
Multiplying a vector A by a negative number −λ gives another vector whose direction is opposite to the direction of A and whose magnitude is λ times |A|.
Subtraction of vectors can be defined in terms of addition of vectors.
The null vector also results when we multiply a vector A by the number zero.
What is the result of adding two equal and opposite vectors ?Consider  two  vectors A and –A shown in Fig.4.3(b).Their sum is A + (–A).
Since vectors obey the commutative and associative laws, we can arrange and regroup the vectors in Eq.
Equation (4.38) gives the x-, and y-coordinates of the position of a projectile at time t in terms of two parameters — initial speed vo and projection angle θo.Notice that the choice of mutually perpendicular x-, and y-directions for the analysis of the projectile motion has resulted in a simplification.One of the components of velocity, i.e.x-component remains constant throughout the motion and only the y- component changes, like an object in free fall in vertical direction.This is shown graphically at few instants in Fig.4.18.
(b) A vector A is resolved into its components Ax and Ay along x-, and y- axes.
(b) Find the magnitude and direction of v(t) at t = 1.0 s.
Suppose that an object is moving in x-y plane and its acceleration a is constant.Over an interval of time, the average acceleration will equal this constant value.Now, let the velocity of the object be v0 at time t = 0 and v at time t.
Let us now find how the position r changes with time.We follow the method used in the one-dimensional case.Let ro and r be the position vectors of the particle at time 0 and t and let the velocities at these instants be vo and v. Then, over this time interval t, the average velocity is  (vo + v)/2.
Thus, the acceleration of an object moving with speed v in a circle of radius R has a magnitude v2/R and is always directed towards the centre.This is why this acceleration is called centripetal acceleration (a term proposed by Newton).A thorough analysis of centripetal acceleration was first published in 1673 by the Dutch scientist Christiaan Huygens (1629-1695) but it was probably known to Newton also some years earlier.“Centripetal” comes from a Greek term which means ‘centre-seeking’.Since v and R are constant, the magnitude of the centripetal acceleration is also constant.However, the direction changes — pointing always towards the centre.Therefore, a centripetal acceleration is not a constant vector.
Thus, each component of the resultant vector R is the sum of the corresponding components of A and B.
Note that in one dimension, the velocity and the acceleration of an object are always along the same straight line (either in the same direction or in the opposite direction).However, for motion in two or three dimensions, velocity and acceleration vectors may have any angle between 0° and 180°  between them.
In order to avoid air resistance, we will have to perform the experiment in vacuum or under low pressure, which is not easy.When we use a phrase like ‘neglect air resistance’, we imply that the change in parameters such as range, height etc.is much smaller than their values without air resistance.The calculation without air resistance is much simpler than that with air resistance.
(4.34b) is that the  motions in x- and y-directions can be treated independently of each other.That is, motion in a plane (two-dimensions) can be treated as two separate simultaneous one-dimensional motions with constant acceleration along two perpendicular directions.This is an important result and is useful in analysing motion of objects in two dimensions.A similar result holds for three dimensions.The choice of perpendicular directions is convenient in many physical situations, as we shall see in section 4.10 for projectile motion.
This method can be extended to addition and subtraction of any number of vectors.
In this section we shall see how to describe motion in two dimensions using vectors.
The direction of velocity v is along the tangent to the circle at every point.The acceleration is directed towards the centre of the circle.Since this direction changes continuously, acceleration here is not a constant vector.
(4.13), a component of a vector can be positive, negative or zero depending on the value of θ.
The position vector r of a particle P located in a plane with reference to the origin of an x-y reference frame (Fig.
The addition of vectors also obeys the associative law as illustrated in Fig.4.4(d).
For example, if A is multiplied by 2, the resultant vector 2A is in the same direction as A and has a magnitude twice of |A| as shown in Fig.4.3(a).
This relative velocity vector as shown in Fig.4.16 makes an angle θ with the vertical.
are unit vectors along x- and y- axis respectively.
Since the magnitude of a null vector is zero, its direction cannot be specified.
In our discussion, we shall assume that the air resistance has negligible effect on the motion of the projectile.Suppose that the projectile is launched with velocity vo that makes an angle θo with  the x-axis as shown in Fig.4.17.
Now, we have two ways to specify a vector A in a plane.
where is a unit vector along A.
Two vectors A and B are said to be equal if, and only if, they have the same magnitude and the same direction.
The horizontal distance travelled by a projectile from its initial position to the position it passes y = 0 during its fall is called the range, R of the projectile.
The horizontal distance travelled by a projectile from its initial position (x = y = 0) to the position where it passes y = 0 during its fall is called the horizontal range, R. It is the distance travelled during the time of flight Tf  .
where Ax, Ay are its components along x-, and y -axes.
Tf  is known as the time of flight of the projectile.We note that Tf  = 2 tm , which is expected because of the symmetry of the parabolic path.
where x and y are components of r along x-, and y- axes or simply they are the coordinates of the object.
where x, y, and z are the components of r along x-, y-,  z-axes, respectively.
When an object follows a circular path at a constant speed, the motion of the object is called uniform circular motion.The word “uniform” refers to the speed, which is uniform (constant) throughout the motion.Suppose an object is moving with uniform speed v in a circle of radius R as shown in Fig.4.19.Since the velocity of the object is changing continuously in direction, the object undergoes acceleration.Let us find the magnitude and the direction of this acceleration.
The meaning of the limiting process can be easily understood with the help of Fig 4.13(a) to (d).In these figures, the thick line represents the path of an object, which is at P at time t.   P1, P2 and P3 represent the positions of the object  after times ∆t1,∆t2, and ∆t3.∆r1,  ∆r2, and ∆r3 are the displacements of the object in times  ∆t1, ∆t2, and ∆t3, respectively.
is again directed towards the centre.In Fig.4.19(c), ∆t→0 and the average acceleration becomes the instantaneous acceleration.It is directed towards the centre*.Thus, we find that the acceleration of an object in uniform circular motion is always directed towards the centre of the circle.Let us now find the magnitude of the acceleration.
The total time Tf during which the projectile is in flight can be obtained by putting y = 0 in         Eq.(4.38).
How much time does the projectile take to reach the maximum height ?Let this time be denoted by tm.Since at this point, vy= 0, we have from Eq.
The concept of relative velocity, introduced in section 3.7 for motion along a straight line, can be easily extended to include motion in a plane or in three dimensions.
The maximum height hm reached by the projectile can be calculated by substituting              t = tm in Eq.
(4.40) is of the form y = a x + b x2, in which a and b are constants.This is the equation of a parabola, i.e.the path of the projectile is a parabola          (Fig.4.18).
, the average acceleration  is perpendicular to ∆r.If we place ∆v on the line that bisects the angle between r and r′, we see that it is directed towards the centre of the circle.Figure 4.19(b) shows the same quantities for smaller time interval.
What is the shape of the path followed by the projectile?This can be seen by eliminating the time between the expressions for x and y as given in Eq.(4.38).
Neglecting air resistance - what does the assumption really mean?
If A and θ  are given,  Ax and Ay  can be obtained using Eq.(4.13).
The equations developed in this chapter for motion in a plane can be easily extended to the case of three dimensions.
lie along the x-, y-, and z-axes.
force, angular momentum, work, current, linear momentum, electric field, average velocity, magnetic moment, relative velocity.
The components of velocity at time t can be obtained using Eq.
Now, for angles, (45° + α) and ( 45° – α), 2θo is (90° + 2α) and ( 90° – 2α) , respectively.The values of sin (90° + 2α) and sin (90° – 2α) are the same, equal to that of cos 2α.Therefore, ranges are equal for elevations which exceed or fall short of 45° by equal amounts α.
(e) has the same value for observers with different orientations of axes.
(a) At what time is the x- coordinate of the particle 16 m?What is the y-coordinate of the particle at that time?
When position of an object is plotted on a coordinate system, v  is  always tangent to the curve representing the path of the object.
So, if the expressions for the coordinates x and y are known as functions of time, we can use these equations to find vx and vy.
Temperature, pressure, impulse, time, power, total path length, energy, gravitational potential, coefficient of friction, charge.
If we take the initial position to be the origin of the reference frame as shown in Fig.
Therefore, the boy should hold his umbrella in the vertical plane at an angle of about 19o with the vertical towards the east.
Equation (4.24a) gives the magnitude of the resultant and Eqs.
Suppose a particle moves along the curve shown by the thick line and is at P at time t and P′ at time t′ [Fig.4.12(b)].
We have another way of describing the velocity and the acceleration of an object  in uniform circular motion.As the object moves from P to P′ in time ∆t (= t′ – t), the line CP (Fig.4.19) turns through an angle ∆θ  as shown in the figure.∆θ  is called angular distance.
Equation (4.43a) shows that for a given projection velocity vo , R is maximum when sin 2θ0is maximum, i.e., when θ0 = 450.
her is the velocity of rain relative to the velocity of the bicycle she is riding.
where t is in seconds and the coefficients have the proper units for r to be in metres.
where t is in seconds and the coefficients  have the proper units for r to be in  metres.
and, respectively, as shown in Fig.4.9(a).
Therefore, the woman should hold her umbrella at an angle of about 19° with the vertical towards the west.
, the direction of the average velocity is the same as that of ∆r (Fig.4.12).
SN is normal to OP and PM is normal to OS.
Now, since g, θo and vo are constants, Eq.
where λ and µ  are real numbers.
and is directed from P to P′.
(4.42).Can you then, anticipate the change in the time of flight?
The time taken by an object to make one revolution is known as its time period T and the number of revolution made in one second is called its frequency ν (=1/T).However, during this time the distance moved by the object is s = 2πR.
where the symbols have their usual meaning.
It can be easily verified that the derivative of Eq.
is shown in figures (a), (b) and (c) for three decreasing values of ∆t, i.e.∆t1,∆t2, and ∆t3, (∆t1 > ∆t2 > ∆t3).As ∆t → 0, ∆r → 0 and is along the tangent to the path [Fig.4.13(d)].Therefore, the direction of velocity at any point on the path of an object is tangential to the path at that point and is in the direction of motion.
The stone hits the  ground when y(t) = – 490 m.
– 490 m = –(1/2)(9.8) t2.
Now, if the distance travelled by the object during the time ∆t is ∆s, i.e.
gives Eq.
(d) 	b + c must lie in the plane of a and d if a and d are not collinear, and in the line of a and d,  if they are collinear ?
(4.33a) and it also satisfies the condition that at t=0, r = ro.
One immediate interpretation of Eq.
When does the equality sign above apply?
(c) A1 and A2 expressed in terms of î and  ĵ .
The angular speed ω, is the rate of change of angular distance.It is related to velocity v by   v = ω R.  The acceleration is ac = ω 2R.
(4.24d) as the Law of sines.
(4.43).Maximum height attained would also be less than that predicted by Eq.
As is clear from Eq.
|λ A| = λ |A | if λ > 0.
where R is given by Eq.(4.24a).
m s-2.
Given x (t) = 84 m, t = ?
(b) What is the speed of the particle at the time ?
(b) What is the magnitude and direction of 		  velocity of the particle at t = 2.0 s ?
(a) Find v(t) and a(t) of the particle.
(a) Find the v and a of the particle?
(4.34a), i.e.
(4.24e) and (4.24f) its direction.Equation (4.24a) is known as the Law of cosines and Eq.
